In today's lesson, you will learn
what Linux is, where Linux came from,
what a Linux distribution is, and some
of the reasons that Linux is favored for
certain applications and
projects over other operating systems.
First and foremost,
Linux is an operating system.
An operating system is simply a collection
of software that manages hardware
resources and provides an environment
where applications can run.
The operating system allows
applications to store information,
send documents to printers,
interact with users, and other things.
Linux is also a kernel.
Typically, when the term Linux is used,
it refers to the Linux
operating system as a whole.
However, it can refer to just
the Linux kernel as well.
The Linux kernel is the core or
the heart of the operating system.
It's the layer that sits between
the hardware and applications.
Said another way, it's the intermediary
between software and hardware.
However, to have a useful operating
system you need other components
in addition to the kernel.
These components can include system
libraries, graphical user interfaces,
email utilities, web browsers,
and other programs.
Linus Torvalds created Linux when he was
a student at the University of Helsinki
studying computer science.
In early 1991, he purchased an IBM
compatible personal computer that came
with a MS-DOS operating system.
Linus wasn't satisfied with MS-DOS, and
wanted to use a UNIX operating system like
he was accustomed to at the university.
When he set out to obtain a copy
of UNIX for his personal use,
he found that the least expensive
UNIX he could buy was about $5,000.
Driven by the desire to run a UNIX-like
Operating System on his personal computer,
he set out to create Linux.
Linus and over 100 developers worked on
Linux over the next couple of years and
in March of 1994, version 1.0 of
the Linux kernel was released.
Linux is open source software.
This means that anyone can use, copy,
study, and change the software in
any way they choose, so long as the source
code is openly shared with others.
To date, thousands of people
have made improvements to Linux.
And with Linux being free and
open source software, it has led to
the rise of Linux distributions.
In every case the source code is free, but
in some cases
the distribution is not free.
The binaries,
the compiled code is not free.
For example, you have to pay a license in
order to run Red Hat Enterprise Linux.
However, Red Hat releases
their source code for
anyone to download, again,
Linux is not a UNIX derivative.
It was written from scratch,
however many of the commands that
are found in Linux are also found on UNIX.
If you have any experience on a UNIX
system you're going to feel right at home
on a Linux system.
A Linux distribution is
the Linux kernel and
a collection of software that
together create an operating system.
Each distribution has its own goals and
areas of focus.
Your choice of distribution will depend
on what you are trying to accomplish.
There are distributions
that are commercial.
These commercial Linux distributions
are backed by corporations, and
you can buy support from them.
There are non-commercial
Linux distributions,
these are maintained by
a community of volunteers.
You have Linux distributions
that are designed for
server use, others that are designed for
desktop use.
Some that are focused on research and
science, there are others that
are focused on multimedia production.
There are literally hundreds
of Linux distributions.
distrowatch.com is a great website
to learn about all the available
Linux distributions,
distro is short for distribution.
On your screen I've listed some
popular Linux distributions,
Red Hat Enterprise Linux,
Fedora, Ubuntu, Debian,
SuSE Linux Enterprise Server,
OpenSuSE, Linux Mint.
Again, there are hundreds of these, these
are just a few of the most popular Linux
distributions, to get an idea of exactly
what's available go to distrowatch.com.
So what are some of the reasons
you would want to run Linux?
Linux runs on many hardware platforms
from dedicated networking devices
to phones to personal computers and
even super computers.
Proprietary UNIX operating
systems typically
only run on their hardware
from their company.
For example, HP-UX only runs on HP
servers, AIX only runs on IBM servers.
Linux can run on HP,
IBM and other servers.
Linux was developed on PC
hardware using Intel processors.
Over time Linux has been ported
to more hardware platforms than
any other operating system.
The small footprint of Linux,
allows it to run on older hardware or
on embedded systems.
Also, Linux is known for
being stable, reliable and secure.
This makes it a great choice for
servers that need to continuously
run without down time.
Linux has traditionally been used for
server applications.
Linux can be used to host websites,
act as file servers, and
even run database software.
Linux doesn't have to be used as a server
though, I find Linux to be a good
every day operating system that
I use on my personal desktop.
As a matter of fact,
I'm recording this course with
software that is running on Linux.
Linux is free, not only is the source code
freely available, but you can run Linux on
your hardware without having to
pay a licensing fee in many cases.
However, if your business depends
on servers that are running Linux,
having a commercial Linux
distribution which you pay for, and
having someone that can provide support,
can be well worth your while.
Linux is typically not as costly as
the proprietary UNIX operating systems.
Linux is also free in the sense that
you can use it for any purpose, and
you can modify it to fit
your needs if you so desire.
There are also many free software
applications that run on Linux,
many of these free applications were
written specifically with Linux in mind.
Let's recap what we've
gone over in this lesson.
First, we learned that Linux
is an operating system.
When someone says the word
Linux without a qualifier,
more than likely they are talking
about the entire operating system.
However, Linux is also a kernel.
When people speak of the Linux kernel,
they are typically specific and
say the Linux kernel.
Linux, being the operating system,
is the intermediary between hardware and
software.
Linux distributions
are implementations of Linux.
Each Linux distribution has a different
goal, and a slightly different focus.
Your choice of distribution will be driven
by the goal you are trying to accomplish.